pages/resources/lisp-workshop/step5.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: "Lisp Workshop - Step 5: Lambda"
permalink: "/resources/lisp-workshop/step5"
---
# THIS PAGE IS A WORK IN PROGRESS!
The theory section isn't yet complete, and not all of the tasks have been added. If you're done with all of the extra tasks from the previous steps, and you're comfortable with a harder challenge, feel free to attempt the tasks here. If not, please be patient - we're working as hard as we can to get this finished!

## Lambdas
Complexity: Long

- capture avoiding substitution

## Task
If you haven't already, you should structure your interpreter so that the environment is passed as an argument to `eval`.

Add a special form to your interpreter, called `lambda`. It takes two arguments; a symbol `n`, and an expression `e`. When evaluating a lambda applied to an argument `v`, a lambda should add (`n`, `v`) to the environment when evaluating `e`.
```scheme
((lambda x (+ x 1)) 41)
--> (+ x 1)  [environment now contains (x, 42)]
--> (+ 41 1)
--> 42
```
Be sure to watch out for cases like `(lambda x (lambda x (+ x 1)))`! Make sure the inner `x` takes precedence over the outer `x`. As an example, `((lambda x (lambda x (+ x 1))) 1 2)` should evaluate to `3`, not `2`. Not convinced? Step through this problem on pen and paper by substituting the arguments one by one.

You should also extend your `define` function to accept the following form:
```scheme
(define func (arg) body)
```
which should be equivalent to:
```scheme
(define func (lambda arg body))
```
You can check the number of elements in a `define` expression to determine which form to use, or you couuld just offer the new form under a different name (`defun` is quite common). Both are perfectly sensible ways to implement this; think about which one you'd prefer to use when writing a program!

Once this is done, you'll have implemented a fully Turing complete programming language! Congratulations!

## Extra Challenges
These are some extra challenges you can attempt to build your understanding further, and make your interpreter more feature-complete. None of them are required for a fully-functional interpreter. They are listed in order of subjective difficulty; if you struggle on the later ones, you should move on to the next step and come back later. Depending on your language choice, they might be easier or harder than anticipated!

- Add support for let statements. Let statements are convenient syntactic sugar for temporarily binding an expression to a name. In Lisp, these look like this:
```scheme
(let ((x 1)
        (y 2))
       (+ x y))
```
  This expression should return:
```scheme
3
```

  `let` takes two arguments: a list of pairs of symbols and expressions, and an expression. We're representing a list as an S-Expression with an arbitrary number of elements, and a pair as an S-Expression with exactly two elements. It's perfectly fine to hard-code this syntax into your evaluator.

  Semantically, `(let ((x v)) e)` is equivalent to `((lambda x e) v)`, and `(let ((x1 v2) (x2 v2)) e)` is equivalent to `(let ((x1 v1)) (let ((x2 v2)) e)))`. We recommend that you directly desugar `let` expression in this way; it saves you from having to implement capture avoiding substitution again!

- Allow lambdas and top-level declarations to take multiple arguments.

  Hint: desugar `(lambda (x y z) e)` into `(lambda x (lambda y (lambda z e)))`

- Support recursion in top-level definitions.

  For example, when evaluating the following file:
```scheme
(define factorial (n)
    (if (equals? 0 n)
          1
          (+ n (factorial (- n 1)))))
(factorial 5)
```
  you should see:
```scheme
120
```

Commit message:

[add] s5: Extra: self-hosting interpreter

pages/resources/lisp-workshop/step5.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: "Lisp Workshop - Step 5: Lambda"
permalink: "/resources/lisp-workshop/step5"
---
# THIS PAGE IS A WORK IN PROGRESS!
The theory section isn't yet complete, and not all of the tasks have been added. If you're done with all of the extra tasks from the previous steps, and you're comfortable with a harder challenge, feel free to attempt the tasks here. If not, please be patient - we're working as hard as we can to get this finished!

## Lambdas
Complexity: Long

- capture avoiding substitution

## Task
If you haven't already, you should structure your interpreter so that the environment is passed as an argument to `eval`.

Add a special form to your interpreter, called `lambda`. It takes two arguments; a symbol `n`, and an expression `e`. When evaluating a lambda applied to an argument `v`, a lambda should add (`n`, `v`) to the environment when evaluating `e`.
```scheme
((lambda x (+ x 1)) 41)
--> (+ x 1)  [environment now contains (x, 42)]
--> (+ 41 1)
--> 42
```
Be sure to watch out for cases like `(lambda x (lambda x (+ x 1)))`! Make sure the inner `x` takes precedence over the outer `x`. As an example, `((lambda x (lambda x (+ x 1))) 1 2)` should evaluate to `3`, not `2`. Not convinced? Step through this problem on pen and paper by substituting the arguments one by one.

You should also extend your `define` function to accept the following form:
```scheme
(define func (arg) body)
```
which should be equivalent to:
```scheme
(define func (lambda arg body))
```
You can check the number of elements in a `define` expression to determine which form to use, or you couuld just offer the new form under a different name (`defun` is quite common). Both are perfectly sensible ways to implement this; think about which one you'd prefer to use when writing a program!

Once this is done, you'll have implemented a fully Turing complete programming language! Congratulations!

## Extra Challenges
These are some extra challenges you can attempt to build your understanding further, and make your interpreter more feature-complete. None of them are required for a fully-functional interpreter. They are listed in order of subjective difficulty; if you struggle on the later ones, you should move on to the next step and come back later. Depending on your language choice, they might be easier or harder than anticipated!

- Add support for let statements. Let statements are convenient syntactic sugar for temporarily binding an expression to a name. In Lisp, these look like this:
```scheme
(let ((x 1)
        (y 2))
       (+ x y))
```
  This expression should return:
```scheme
3
```

  `let` takes two arguments: a list of pairs of symbols and expressions, and an expression. We're representing a list as an S-Expression with an arbitrary number of elements, and a pair as an S-Expression with exactly two elements. It's perfectly fine to hard-code this syntax into your evaluator.

  Semantically, `(let ((x v)) e)` is equivalent to `((lambda x e) v)`, and `(let ((x1 v2) (x2 v2)) e)` is equivalent to `(let ((x1 v1)) (let ((x2 v2)) e)))`. We recommend that you directly desugar `let` expression in this way; it saves you from having to implement capture avoiding substitution again!

- Allow `lambda`s and top-level declarations to take more than one argument.

  Hint: desugar `(lambda (x y z) e)` into `(lambda x (lambda y (lambda z e)))`

- Support recursion in top-level definitions.

  For example, when evaluating the following file:
```scheme
(define factorial (n)
    (if (equals? 0 n)
          1
          (+ n (factorial (- n 1)))))
(factorial 5)
```
  you should see:
```scheme
120
```

- Write a self-hosting interpreter. This means re-implementing *everything* you've done so far as a program in your language.
